Placeholder PR: Blog for Volume Group Snapshot (#39415)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-05-08-volume-group-snapshot-alpha.md

This feature introduces a Kubernetes API that allows users to take a crash consistent
snapshot for multiple volumes together. It uses a label selector to group multiple
PersistentVolumeClaims for snapshotting.
This new feature is only supported for CSI volume drivers.

## What is Volume Group Snapshot

Some storage systems provide the ability to create a crash consistent snapshot of
multiple volumes. A group snapshot represents “copies” from multiple volumes that
are taken at the same point-in-time. A group snapshot can be used either to rehydrate
new volumes (pre-populated with the snapshot data) or to restore existing volumes to
a previous state (represented by the snapshots).

## Why add Volume Group Snapshots to Kubernetes?

The Kubernetes volume plugin system already provides a powerful abstraction that
automates the provisioning, attaching, mounting, resizing, and snapshotting of block
and file storage.

Underpinning all these features is the Kubernetes goal of workload portability:
Kubernetes aims to create an abstraction layer between distributed applications and
underlying clusters so that applications can be agnostic to the specifics of the

> cluster they run on and application deployment requires no “cluster specific” knowledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster they run on and application deployment requires no cluster specific knowledge.
```

There is already a [VolumeSnapshot API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/177-volume-snapshot)
that provides the ability to take a snapshot of a persistent volume to protect against
data loss or data corruption. However, there are other snapshotting functionalities
not covered by the VolumeSnapshot API.

Some storage systems support consistent group snapshots that allow a snapshot to be
taken from multiple volumes at the same point-in-time to achieve write order consistency.
This can be useful for applications that contain multiple volumes. For example,
an application may have data stored in one volume and logs stored in another volume.
If snapshots for the data volume and the logs volume are taken at different times,
the application will not be consistent and will not function properly if it is restored
from those snapshots when a disaster strikes.

It is true that we can quiesce the application first, take an individual snapshot from
each volume that is part of the application one after the other, and then unquiesce the
application after all the individual snapshots are taken. This way we will get application
consistent snapshots.

> However, application quiesce is time consuming. Sometimes it may not be possible to

Author: Reworded this.

quiesce an application. Taking individual snapshots one after another may also take
longer time compared to taking a consistent group snapshot. Some users may not want
to do application quiesce very frequently for these reasons. For example, a user may
want to run weekly backups with application quiesce and nightly backups without
application quiesce but with consistent group support which provides crash consistency
across all volumes in the group.

## Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots API

Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots introduce [three new API objects](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter/blob/master/client/apis/volumegroupsnapshot/v1alpha1/types.go) for managing snapshots:

`VolumeGroupSnapshot`
: Created by a Kubernetes user (or perhaps by your own automation) to request

> creation of a volume group snapshot for multiple volumes.

Author: Yes.  Added.

It contains information about the volume group snapshot operation such as the
timestamp when the volume group snapshot was taken and whether it is ready to use.
The creation and deletion of this object represents a desire to create or delete a
cluster resource (a group snapshot).

`VolumeGroupSnapshotContent`
: Created by the snapshot controller for a dynamically created VolumeGroupSnapshot.
It contains information about the volume group snapshot including the volume group
snapshot ID.
This object represents a provisioned resource on the cluster (a group snapshot).
The VolumeGroupSnapshotContent object binds to the VolumeGroupSnapshot for which it
was created with a one-to-one mapping.

`VolumeGroupSnapshotClass`
: Created by cluster administrators to describe how volume group snapshots should be
created. including the driver information, the deletion policy, etc.

> The Volume Group Snapshot objects are defined as CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs).

Author: Done

These CRDs must be installed in a Kubernetes cluster for a CSI Driver to support
volume group snapshots.

## How do I use Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots

> Volume Group Snapshot feature is implemented in the

Author: Done

[external-snapshotter](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter) repository. Implementing volume
group snapshots meant adding or changing several components:

> * Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshot CRDs

Author: Done

* Volume group snapshot controller logic is added to the common snapshot controller.
* Volume group snapshot validation webhook logic is added to the common snapshot validation webhook.

> * Logic to make CSI calls is added to CSI Snapshotter sidecar controller.

Author: Done

The volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation webhook are deployed once per
cluster, while the sidecar is bundled with each CSI driver.

Therefore, it makes sense to deploy the volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation

> webhook as a cluster addon. It is strongly recommended that Kubernetes distributors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
webhook as a cluster addon. I strongly recommend that Kubernetes distributors
```
We should say who is making the recommendation.

Author: Done

bundle and deploy the volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation webhook as part
of their Kubernetes cluster management process (independent of any CSI Driver).

### Creating a new group snapshot with Kubernetes

Once a VolumeGroupSnapshotClass object is defined and you have volumes you want to

> snapshot together, you may create a new group snapshot by creating a VolumeGroupSnapshot

Author: Sure

object.

The source of the group snapshot specifies whether the underlying group snapshot
should be dynamically created or if a pre-existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent

> should be used. One of the following members in the source must be set.

Reviewer: We should explain when you might use an existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent, and why.

Author: Added.

* Selector - Selector is a label query over persistent volume claims that are to be grouped together for snapshotting. This labelSelector will be used to match the label added to a PVC.

> * VolumeGroupSnapshotContentName - specifies the name of a pre-existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent object representing an existing volume group snapshot.

Author: Done

  source:
     volumeGroupSnapshotHandle: group-snap-id
  volumeGroupSnapshotRef:
    kind: VolumeGroupSnapshot
    name: pre-existing-group-snap1
    namespace: demo-namespace
```

A VolumeGroupSnapshot object should be created to allow a user to use the group snapshot:

```yaml
apiVersion: groupsnapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeGroupSnapshot
metadata:
  name: pre-existing-group-snap1
  namespace: demo-namespace
spec:
  snapshotContentName: pre-existing-group-snap-content1
```

Once these objects are created, the snapshot controller will bind them together,
and set the field `status.ready` to `"True"` to indicate the group snapshot is ready
to use.

### How to use group snapshot for restore in Kubernetes

At restore time, the user can request a new PersistentVolumeClaim to be created from
a VolumeSnapshot object that is part of a VolumeGroupSnapshot. This will trigger
provisioning of a new volume that is pre-populated with data from the specified
snapshot. The user should repeat this until all volumes are created from all the
snapshots that are part of a group snapshot.

## As a storage vendor, how do I add support for group snapshots to my CSI driver?

> To implement the volume group snapshot feature, a CSI driver MUST:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement the volume group snapshot feature, a CSI driver **must**:
```
We use bold for emphasis.

Author: Done

for more details.

Although Kubernetes poses as little prescriptive on the packaging and deployment of
a CSI Volume Driver as possible, it provides a suggested mechanism to deploy a
containerized CSI driver to simplify the process.

As part of this recommended deployment process, the Kubernetes team provides a number of
sidecar (helper) containers, including the
[external-snapshotter sidecar container](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-snapshotter.html)
which has been updated to support volume group snapshot.

The external-snapshotter watches the Kubernetes API server for the
`VolumeGroupSnapshotContent` object and triggers `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` and
`DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot` operations against a CSI endpoint.

## What are the limitations?

The alpha implementation of volume group snapshots for Kubernetes has the following
limitations:

* Does not support reverting an existing PVC to an earlier state represented by a snapshot that is part of a group snapshot (only supports provisioning a new volume from a snapshot).
* No application consistency guarantees beyond any guarantees provided by the storage system (e.g. crash consistency).

> 

Reviewer: What about adding this?
```suggestion

Whether you plan to quiesce your application or take a live snapshot, you should consider
whether to request a freeze for any filesystem backed by block storage. For example, use
`ioctl(fd, FIFREEZE, 0);` to trigger a freeze, then take the (group) snapshot, and finally
trigger a thaw.

```

I don't know if the fzfreeze is a responsibility of the CSI Driver, but I assume that it _isn't_.

Author: fsfreeze is not done by the CSI driver. There are some discussions about this here: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/407. 
There's also this effort here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1995

I'm hesitant to give an example using fsfreeze because application quiesce could mean using database specific methods, i.e., db.fsyncLock() for MongoDB.

Reviewer: The point I want to make is that you might incorrectly think that `fsync()` is enough. For some filesystems it might be. For others, the lack of a `FIFREEZE` might mean the difference between a snapshot that is recoverable and a snapshot that probably will be but we're not sure.

We _don't_ need to mention the ioctl but we might want to let readers know that there's more to it than quiescing at app level and hoping. A particularly unhelpful setup might do a heartbeat write every second even when the app isn't active, for example. And then that gets split over multiple blocks at the storage layer. I have a feeling I've even worked with a system with these properties.

Author: Sure.  I added a reference to this doc: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-data-protection/data-protection-workflows-white-paper.md#quiesce-and-unquiesce-hooks

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.27: Introducing An API For Volume Group Snapshots"

> date: 2023-05-08T10:00:00-08:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-05-08
```

slug: kubernetes-1-27-volume-group-snapshot-alpha
---

**Author:** Xing Yang (VMware)

Volume group snapshot is introduced as an Alpha feature in Kubernetes v1.27.

> This feature introduces a Kubernetes API that allows users to take a crash consistent
> snapshot for multiple volumes together. It uses a label selector to group multiple

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This feature introduces a Kubernetes API that allows users to take crash consistent
snapshots for multiple volumes together. It uses a label selector to group multiple
```

If snapshots for the data volume and the logs volume are taken at different times,
the application will not be consistent and will not function properly if it is restored
from those snapshots when a disaster strikes.

It is true that you can quiesce the application first, take an individual snapshot from
each volume that is part of the application one after the other, and then unquiesce the
application after all the individual snapshots are taken. This way, you would get
application consistent snapshots.

However, sometimes it may not be possible to quiesce an application or the application
quiesce can be too expensive so you want to do it less frequently. Taking individual
snapshots one after another may also take longer time compared to taking a consistent
group snapshot. Some users may not want to do application quiesce very often for these
reasons. For example, a user may want to run weekly backups with application quiesce
and nightly backups without application quiesce but with consistent group support which
provides crash consistency across all volumes in the group.

## Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots API

> Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots introduce [three new API objects](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter/blob/master/client/apis/volumegroupsnapshot/v1alpha1/types.go) for managing snapshots:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes Volume Group Snapshots introduce [three new API
objects](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter/blob/master/client/apis/volumegroupsnapshot/v1alpha1/types.go)
for managing snapshots:
```

* Volume group snapshot controller logic is added to the common snapshot controller.
* Volume group snapshot validation webhook logic is added to the common snapshot validation webhook.
* Adding logic to make CSI calls into the snapshotter sidecar controller.

The volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation webhook are deployed once per
cluster, while the sidecar is bundled with each CSI driver.

Therefore, it makes sense to deploy the volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation
webhook as a cluster addon. I strongly recommend that Kubernetes distributors
bundle and deploy the volume snapshot controller, CRDs, and validation webhook as part
of their Kubernetes cluster management process (independent of any CSI Driver).

### Creating a new group snapshot with Kubernetes

Once a VolumeGroupSnapshotClass object is defined and you have volumes you want to
snapshot together, you may request a new group snapshot by creating a VolumeGroupSnapshot
object.

The source of the group snapshot specifies whether the underlying group snapshot
should be dynamically created or if a pre-existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent
should be used.

> A pre-existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent is created by a cluster administrator.

Author: Sure.  I removed the example for the import case.

It contains the details of the real volume group snapshot on the storage system which
is available for use by cluster users.

One of the following members in the source of the group snapshot must be set.

> * `selector` - a label query over PersistentVolumeClaims that are to be grouped
> together for snapshotting. This labelSelector will be used to match the label
> added to a PVC.
> * `volumeGroupSnapshotContentName` - specifies the name of a pre-existing VolumeGroupSnapshotContent object representing an existing volume group snapshot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `selector` - a label query over PersistentVolumeClaims that are to be grouped
  together for snapshotting. This labelSelector will be used to match the label
  added to a PVC.
* `volumeGroupSnapshotContentName` - specifies the name of a pre-existing
  VolumeGroupSnapshotContent object representing an existing volume group snapshot.
```

metadata:
  name: pre-existing-group-snap-content1
spec:
  driver: com.example.csi-driver
  deletionPolicy: Delete
  source:
     volumeGroupSnapshotHandle: group-snap-id
  volumeGroupSnapshotRef:
    kind: VolumeGroupSnapshot
    name: pre-existing-group-snap1
    namespace: demo-namespace
```

A VolumeGroupSnapshot object should be created to allow a user to use the group snapshot:

```yaml
apiVersion: groupsnapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeGroupSnapshot
metadata:
  name: pre-existing-group-snap1
  namespace: demo-namespace
spec:
  snapshotContentName: pre-existing-group-snap-content1
```

Once these objects are created, the snapshot controller will bind them together,
and set the field `status.ready` to `"True"` to indicate the group snapshot is ready
to use.

### How to use group snapshot for restore in Kubernetes

At restore time, the user can request a new PersistentVolumeClaim to be created from
a VolumeSnapshot object that is part of a VolumeGroupSnapshot. This will trigger
provisioning of a new volume that is pre-populated with data from the specified
snapshot. The user should repeat this until all volumes are created from all the

> snapshots that are part of a group snapshot.

Author: Done

* Add group controller capability `CREATE_DELETE_GET_VOLUME_GROUP_SNAPSHOT`.

See the [CSI spec](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md)
and the [Kubernetes-CSI Driver Developer Guide](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
for more details.

Although Kubernetes poses as little prescriptive on the packaging and deployment of
a CSI Volume Driver as possible, it provides a suggested mechanism to deploy a
containerized CSI driver to simplify the process.

As part of this recommended deployment process, the Kubernetes team provides a number of
sidecar (helper) containers, including the
[external-snapshotter sidecar container](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/external-snapshotter.html)
which has been updated to support volume group snapshot.

The external-snapshotter watches the Kubernetes API server for the
`VolumeGroupSnapshotContent` object and triggers `CreateVolumeGroupSnapshot` and
`DeleteVolumeGroupSnapshot` operations against a CSI endpoint.

## What are the limitations?

The alpha implementation of volume group snapshots for Kubernetes has the following
limitations:

> * Does not support reverting an existing PVC to an earlier state represented by a snapshot that is part of a group snapshot (only supports provisioning a new volume from a snapshot).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Does not support reverting an existing PVC to an earlier state represented by
  a snapshot that is part of a group snapshot (only supports provisioning a new
  volume from a snapshot).
```

> * No application consistency guarantees beyond any guarantees provided by the storage system (e.g. crash consistency). See this [doc](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-data-protection/data-protection-workflows-white-paper.md#quiesce-and-unquiesce-hooks) for more discussions on application consistency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* No application consistency guarantees beyond any guarantees provided by the storage system
  (e.g. crash consistency). See this [doc](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-data-protection/data-protection-workflows-white-paper.md#quiesce-and-unquiesce-hooks)
  for more discussions on application consistency.
```

## What’s next?

Depending on feedback and adoption, the Kubernetes team plans to push the CSI
Group Snapshot implementation to Beta in either 1.28 or 1.29.
Some of the features we are interested in supporting include volume replication,
replication group, volume placement, application quiescing, changed block tracking, and more.

## How can I learn more?

> The design spec for the volume group snapshot feature is [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/3476-volume-group-snapshot).
> 
> The code repository for volume group snapshot APIs and controller is [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter).
> 
> Check out additional documentation on the group snapshot feature [here](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [design spec](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-storage/3476-volume-group-snapshot)
  for the volume group snapshot feature.
- The [code repository](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-snapshotter) for volume group
  snapshot APIs and controller.
- CSI [documentation](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) on the group snapshot feature.
```

* Jing Xu ([jingxu97](https://github.com/jingxu97))
* Michelle Au ([msau42](https://github.com/msau42))
* Niels de Vos ([nixpanic](https://github.com/nixpanic))
* Rakshith R ([Rakshith-R](https://github.com/Rakshith-R))
* Raunak Shah ([RaunakShah](https://github.com/RaunakShah))
* Saad Ali ([saad-ali](https://github.com/saad-ali))
* Thomas Watson ([rbo54](https://github.com/rbo54))
* Xing Yang ([xing-yang](https://github.com/xing-yang))
* Yati Padia ([yati1998](https://github.com/yati1998))

We also want to thank everyone else who has contributed to the project, including others 
who helped review the [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1551)
and the [CSI spec PR](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/pull/519).

For those interested in getting involved with the design and development of CSI or
any part of the Kubernetes Storage system, join the
[Kubernetes Storage Special Interest Group](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-storage) (SIG).
We always welcome new contributors.

We also hold regular [Data Protection Working Group meetings](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#).

> New attendees are welcome to join our discussions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
New attendees are welcomed to join our discussions.
```

Reviewer 3: I believe "welcome" is more grammatically correct here.

https://preply.com/en/question/welcome-or-welcomed
